URL: https://www.britannica.com/animal/dog
==================================================

dog Table of Contents Introduction & Top Questions Origin and history of dogs Ancestry Role in human societies Origin of breeds Physical traits and functions General characteristics Teeth Digestive system Skeletal structure Senses Coats Reproduction Sexual maturity Reproductive cycle Gestation and whelping Reproductive capacity Behaviour Territory and range Barking Aging and behavioral development Breed-specific behaviour Dogs as pets Selection Nutrition and growth Training Other maintenance concerns Ailments The breeds Sporting dogs Hounds Terriers Working dogs Herding dogs Toys Non-Sporting dogs Breed standards Related canids Wolves Coyotes Foxes Jackals Other wild canids References & Edit History Quick Facts & Related Topics Images, Videos & Interactives For Students dog summary Quizzes Ultimate Animals Quiz Animal Group Names The Dog Breed Quiz Deadliest Animals Quiz Wild Words from the Animal Kingdom Vocabulary Quiz Related Questions Why do dogs bark? Why do dogs sniff other dogs’ rear ends? How are dog years calculated? When do dogs need shots? What is a dog? Read Next 6 Domestic Animals and Their Wild Ancestors Working Like a Dog: 7 Animals with Jobs Abundant Animals: The Most Numerous Organisms in the World Are Dogs Really Color-Blind? 9 of the World’s Deadliest Mammals Discover Inventors and Inventions of the Industrial Revolution The 10 Greatest Basketball Players of All Time What's the Difference Between a Solstice and an Equinox? Do Camels Store Water in Their Humps? The Lost Colony of Roanoke Which Waters Do You Pass Through When You “Sail the Seven Seas”? 10 Greatest Baseball Players of All Time Contents Science Mammals Dogs & the Canine Family Labradoodle A Labradoodle is a cross between a Labrador Retriever and a Poodle, a mix intended to incorporate the Poodle's intelligence and low-shedding coat with a Lab's energy and determination. (more) dog mammal Ask the Chatbot a Question More Actions Print print Print Please select which sections you would like to print: Table Of Contents Cite verified Cite While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies. Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions. Select Citation Style MLA APA Chicago Manual of Style Copy Citation Share Share Share to social media Facebook X URL https://www.britannica.com/animal/dog Feedback External Websites Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). Feedback Type Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Your Feedback Submit Feedback Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. External Websites A-Z Animals - Types of Dogs: All Breeds From A-Z Merck Veterinary Manual - Description and Physical Characteristics of Dogs Animal Diversity Web - Dog Charles Darwin Foundation - Galapagos Species Checklist - Canis lupus familiaris Linnaeus, 1758 National Center for Biotechnology Information - PubMed Central - A Review of Domestic Dogs' (Canis Familiaris) Human-Like Behaviors: Or Why Behavior Analysts Should Stop Worrying and Love Their Dogs Britannica Websites Articles from Britannica Encyclopedias for elementary and high school students. dog - Children's Encyclopedia (Ages 8-11) dog - Student Encyclopedia (Ages 11 and up) Ask the Chatbot a Question Also known as: Canis lupus familiaris Written by Constance B. Vanacore Freelance writer. Features Editor, Pure-Bred Dogs, American Kennel Gazette, 1974–81. Author of Dog Showing: An Owner's Guide and others. Constance B. Vanacore Fact-checked by The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica Encyclopaedia Britannica's editors oversee subject areas in which they have extensive knowledge, whether from years of experience gained by working on that content or via study for an advanced degree. They write new content and verify and edit content received from contributors. The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica Last Updated: Mar 26, 2025 • Article History Table of Contents Table of Contents Ask the Chatbot Key People: Dorothy Leib Harrison Wood Eustis George H. Whipple Tokugawa Tsunayoshi (Show more) Related Topics: Poodle Schnauzer teacup dog feral dog Labradoodle (Show more) See all related content Top Questions Why do dogs bark? Barking is a way for dogs to communicate with other dogs and with humans. Fierce barking or growling often signals that dogs are being territorial, feel threatened, or simply want to be left alone. However, dogs also bark when they are bored and want attention from other dogs or from humans. Why do dogs sniff other dogs’ rear ends? A dog may sniff other dogs’ rear ends to gather chemical information that helps the sniffer identify them as individuals. Gland -lined sacs, housed internally on either side of a dog’s anus, produce a scent that contributes to each dog’s unique odor profile. That profile may also indicate genetic makeup, reproductive status, diet, and emotional state. How are dog years calculated? Many people have learned that one human year equals roughly seven dog years. However, this is a huge oversimplification. How a dog ages is based largely on its size and breed. Smaller dogs tend to age “slower” than larger dogs. Also, the aging rate of some breeds, such as beagles, differs from that of other similarly sized breeds. When do dogs need shots? Beginning when dogs are six weeks old, a series of four doses of combined vaccines against distemper , hepatitis , parainfluenza, and parvovirus are given two to four weeks apart. Within one year of that series, they receive a booster, which is readministered every three years. At three months old, dogs can receive a rabies vaccine, which is readministered every year or every three years. What is a dog? A dog is a domesticated mammal of the family Canidae and the order Carnivora. Its scientific name is Canis lupus familiaris . Dogs are a subspecies of the gray wolf, and they are also related to foxes and jackals. Dogs are one of the two most ubiquitous and most popular domestic animals in the world. ( Cats are the other.) News • Dog found abandoned in trash bin, Ann Arbor police seeking info on owner • Mar. 25, 2025, 9:30 AM ET (CBS) ... (Show more) Dog found dead on Elvaston Castle estate after suspected stabbing • Mar. 19, 2025, 7:35 AM ET (BBC) Dog confiscated and owner fined NT$200,000 after attacks • Mar. 17, 2025, 8:18 AM ET (Taipei Times) Barry Island: Dog dies after being attacked on beach • Mar. 6, 2025, 4:01 AM ET (BBC) Study finds wolves may have self-domesticated into dogs near human settlements • Mar. 1, 2025, 5:09 AM ET (Jerusalem Post) Show less dog , ( Canis lupus familiaris ), domestic mammal of the family Canidae (order Carnivora). It is a subspecies of the gray wolf ( Canis lupus ) and is related to foxes and jackals . The dog is one of the two most ubiquitous and most popular domestic animals in the world (the cat is the other). For more than 12,000 years it has lived with humans as a hunting companion, protector, object of scorn or adoration, and friend. What do you think? Should Pit Bulls be Banned? Explore the ProCon debate The dog evolved from the gray wolf into more than 400 distinct breeds. Human beings have played a major role in creating dogs that fulfill distinct societal needs. Through the most rudimentary form of genetic engineering , dogs were bred to accentuate instincts that were evident from their earliest encounters with humans. Although details about the evolution of dogs are uncertain, the first dogs were hunters with keen senses of sight and smell. Humans developed these instincts and created new breeds as need or desire arose. The sizes of dogs Dogs vary significantly in size. Chihuahuas, the smallest recognized dog breed, can be 5 to 8 inches (about 13 to 20 cm) tall at the shoulder, while the Irish Wolfhound, the tallest dog breed, can be 30 inches (76 cm) or more. (more) Dogs are regarded differently in different parts of the world. Characteristics of loyalty, friendship, protectiveness, and affection have earned dogs an important position in Western society, and in the United States and Europe the care and feeding of dogs has become a multibillion-dollar business. Western civilization has given the relationship between human and dog great importance, but, in some of the developing nations and in many areas of Asia, dogs are not held in the same esteem. In some areas of the world, dogs are used as guards or beasts of burden or even for food, whereas in the United States and Europe dogs are protected and admired. In ancient Egypt during the days of the pharaohs, dogs were considered to be sacred. 1 of 12 Origin and history of dogs Ancestry Paleontologists and archaeologists have determined that about 60 million years ago a small mammal, rather like a weasel , lived in the environs of what are now parts of Asia. It is called Miacis , the genus that became the ancestor of the animals known today as canids: dogs, jackals, wolves, and foxes. Miacis did not leave direct descendants, but doglike canids evolved from it. By about 30 to 40 million years ago Miacis had evolved into the first true dog—namely, Cynodictis . This was a medium-size animal , longer than it was tall, with a long tail and a fairly brushy coat. Over the millennia Cynodictis gave rise to two branches, one in Africa and the other in Eurasia . The Eurasian branch was called Tomarctus and is the progenitor of wolves, dogs, and foxes. Genetic evidence suggests that dogs descended directly from wolves ( Canis ) and that the now-extinct wolf lineages that produced dogs branched off from the line that produced modern living wolves sometime between 27,000 and 40,000 years ago. The timing and location of dog domestication is a matter of debate. There is strong genetic evidence, however, that the first domestication events occurred somewhere in northern Eurasia between 14,000 and 29,000 years ago. In this region wolves likely facilitated their own domestication by trailing nomadic people in northern Eurasia and consuming the remains of game animals that hunters left behind. Britannica Quiz Deadliest Animals Quiz Most studies agree that domestication was not a single discrete event. It was a process that unfolded over thousands of years—likely involving dog populations that appeared in different parts of Eurasia at different times, with dogs and wild wolves continuing to interbreed with one another and with early dog populations being replaced by later ones. Some genetic studies have documented evidence of early domestication events in specific regions. One study contends that wolves were domesticated 16,300 years ago to serve as livestock in China , whereas another reports that early dogs dating from about 12,000 to 14,000 years ago came from a small strain of gray wolf that inhabited India . Genetic evidence also reveals that dogs did not accompany the first humans to the New World more than 15,000 years ago, suggesting instead that dogs came to the Americas only some 10,000 years ago. One study even suggested that some dogs have descended not from the wolf but rather from the jackal . These dogs, found in Africa , might have given rise to some of the present native African breeds. No matter what their origins, all canids have certain common characteristics . They are mammals that bear live young. The females have mammary glands, and they suckle their offspring. The early breeds had erect ears and pointed or wedge-shaped muzzles, similar to the northern breeds common today. Most of the carnivores have similar dental structures, which is one way paleontologists have been able to identify them. They develop two sets of teeth, deciduous (“baby”) teeth and permanent teeth. Are you a student? Get a special academic rate on Britannica Premium. Subscribe Canids walk on their toes, in contrast to an animal like the bear, which is flat-footed and walks on its heels. Dogs, like most mammals, have body hair and are homeothermic—that is to say, they have an internal thermostat that permits them to maintain their body temperature at a constant level despite the outside temperature. Fossil remains suggest that five distinct types of dogs existed by the beginning of the Bronze Age (about 4500 bce ). They were the mastiffs, wolf-type dogs, sight hounds (such as the Saluki or greyhound), pointing dogs, and herding dogs.